## Algorithms Analysis and Design

#### Week 5  - Diary 



#### Ayan Agrawal (2020101034)



### Lecture 8 : Set Cover and Approximation Algorithms

#### Problems for the class :

In Lecture 8, we progressed our discussion on the Greedy algorithms towards how to realize an approximate solution to NP-complete problem (close to optimal solution by a factor of $$logn$$). 

Points discussed were :

- Set cover problem
- Reason Greedy method fails in this problem
- How close greedy method has came to the optimal solution.



#### 1. Set - Cover Problem

##### 		Problem statement : 

​	Let's try to understand the problem statement for Set cover problem:

​	***Input :*** Set $$B$$ containing elements and a set of subsets $$S_1,S_2,...S_n$$ in $$B$$.

​	***Output :*** Selected $$S_i$$ such that union of all $$S_i$$ is set $$B$$. 

​	***Work :*** Number of Sets selected.

- This is an NP- complete problem meaning there is no polynomial time solution that this problem (that is know algorithms are exponential in n) but we can check the solution in Polynomial time .
- Because of the nature of this problem(NP-complete) , it becomes important to study this problem because getting a polynomial time  solution to this problem would mean we can solve all NP-Complete  problems and this can be one of the biggest revolutions in human history.

​	Here, Minimum set cover is defined as minimum cost incurred, now let's see different ways to solve it,

##### 	1. Naive Solution 

- It will involve most basic solution of checking all $$2^n$$ subsets of $$S_i$$, and see which all will give B on union. We can store cost incurred along with it and see the minimum cost for the same. 
- This would give the most appropriate solution but we can't always perform such an expensive method (exponential solution), so it is better to find a less expensive method which gives accurate or near to accurate solution.



##### 	2. Greedy Approach

- As seen previously, if we can prove that our first step in a Greedy algorithm is always bound to be correct, we can recurse this step and by the **optimum substructure property**, we would get the correct result always. 
- In this problem, we see that the greedy algorithm does not work as determining the first step itself is inaccurate/ time consuming.Though we can try to take a first step which is partially correct, and for all practical purposes, it would give us a near accurate result if not the best in very less time.

- For this, Let's use approximation algo theory, a greedy approach for this problem is as follows : 

  ​		***Pick Set $$S_i$$ with largest number of non-included elements in set B.*** 

But, this solution isn't correct always, let's take a counter example, 

Suppose $$B = \{1,2,3,4,5,6\}, S_1 = \{1,2,3,4\}, S_2 = \{1,3,5\}, S_3 = \{2,4,6\}$$.

We will choose $$S_1$$ then $$S_2, S_3$$ in any order but work done will be $$3$$. 

However, choosing just $$S_2 , S_3$$ will just select B and do the work of $2$. 

Therefore, Greedy method fails and we determine that the set cover problem is a NP-complete problem. Lets try to understand just how accurate is the greedy strategy is with respect to the actual solution.



##### 	Accuracy of the Greedy Strategy : 

*Claim:*

***Suppose $$B$$ contains $$n$$ elements and the optimal set contains $$k$$ subsets. Greedy algorithm will use at most $$kln(n)$$ sets.*** 

*Proof :*

Let's say we have $$n_i$$ elements left after $$i$$ iterations of the algorithm.
		So, $$n_0 = n$$ 
		One key observation in the proof is that at an iteration $$i$$ , if we have $$n_i$$  elements left, then as there are $$k$$ sets at best. One set should at least have $$n_i /k$$elements in it by Pigeon hole principle.

Therefore, inequality acquired is 

​				$$n_{i+1} \leq n_i - n_i/k$$ 

Now, recursing over $$i$$ from $$0$$ to $$t$$, we get 

​				$$n_i \leq n_0(1 - 1/k)^t.$$ 

Also,

​				$$e^{-x} \geq 1-x.$$

 Thus, final inequality is :

​				$$n_i \leq n(e^{-i/k}).$$ 

When we hit a point where $$n_i$$  is lesser than $1$ , we are sure to have found a solution. Therefore, at $$i = kln(n)$$  , the RHS approaches $1$ . At every iteration we have assigned one set and thus total sets would be equal to total iterations. Thus we get a bound of $$kln(n)$$ . 

So, we call this an $$O(ln(n))$$ approximate solution.